 A Pi microscope is a laser scanning fluorescence microscope with an improved axial resolution . The typical value of – nm can be improved to – nm, which corresponds to an almost spherical focal spot with – times less volume than that of standard confocal microscopy . 


 The improvement in resolution is achieved by using two opposing objective lenses, which both are focused to the same geometrical location. Also the difference in optical path length through each of the two objective lenses is carefully aligned to be minimal. By this method, molecules residing in the common focal area of both objectives can be illuminated coherently from both sides and the reflected or emitted light can be collected coherently, i.e. coherent superposition of emitted light on the detector is possible. The solid angle Ω  that is used for illumination and detection is increased and approaches the ideal case. In this case the sample is illuminated and detected from all sides simultaneously.
 The operation mode of a Pi microscope is shown in the figure. The laser light is divided by a beam splitter BS and directed by mirrors towards the two opposing objective lenses. At the common focal point superposition of both focused light beams occurs. Excited molecules at this position emit fluorescence light, which is collected by both objective lenses, combined by the same beam splitter and deflected by a dichroic mirror DM onto a detector. There superposition of both emitted light pathways can take place again.
 In the ideal case each objective lens can collect light from a solid angle of Ω =  π  .
 It can be operated in three different ways: In a Pi microscope of type A, the coherent superposition of excitation light is used to generate the increased resolution. The emission light is either detected from one side only or in an incoherent superposition from both sides. In a Pi microscope of type B, only the emission light is interfering. When operated in the type C mode, both excitation and emission light are allowed to interfere, leading to the highest possible resolution increase ~fold along the optical axis as compared to confocal microscopy.
 In a real Pi microscope light is not applied from all sides, leading to socalled side lobes in the point spread function . Typically but not always twophoton excitation microscopy is used in a Pi microscope in combination with an emission pinhole to lower these side lobes to a tolerable level.
 In , Christoph Cremer and Thomas Cremer proposed the creation of a perfect hologram , i.e. one that carries the whole field information of the emission of a point source in all directions, a socalled  π  hologram.  
 The first description of a practicable system of Pi microscopy, i.e. the setup with two opposing, interfering lenses, was invented by Stefan Hell in .  He demonstrated it experimentally in . 
 In the following years the number of applications for this microscope has grown. Parallel excitation and detection with  spots in the sample simultaneously combined with the improved spatial resolution resulted in the successful recording of the dynamics of mitochondria in yeast cells with a Pi microscope in . 
 A commercial version was launched by microscope manufacturer Leica Microsystems in . 
 Up to now, the best quality in a Pi microscope was reached in conjunction with the stimulated emission depletion microscope STED principle.  Using a Pi microscope with appropriate excitation and deexcitation beams, it was possible to create a uniformly  nm sized spot, which corresponds to a decreased focal volume compared to confocal microscopy by a factor of – in fixed cells. With the combination of Pi microscopy and RESOLFT microscopy with switchable proteins, it is now possible to take images of living cells at low light levels with isotropic resolutions below  nm. 